---
layout: post
title:  "RailsConf 2015"
date:   2015-04-04 12:00:18
categories: rails events
#tags: featured
image: /assets/article_images/2015-04-04-railsconf-2015/atlanta.jpg
---

# RailsConf 2015

An account of my first trip to RailsConf. This is mostly stream-of-consciousness stuff, so please forgive any disjointedness.

### Tuesday: Keynote

Apparently DHH dropped a bomb on everyone, including the Rails Core Team, with the announcement that Action Cable would be included in Rails 5. Now, I'm not sure he said it would actually be included, so much as it's something he's excited about. But the reaction was rather strong (check twitter).

I'm actually excited about Action Cable. It looks like a nice API for working with web sockets, which is something I've wanted to include in a project many times but could never justify the effort. Hopefully this is something I'll get to use in the future.

Also, TurboLinks 3 is coming, thanks to Shopify. It looks like there are some good improvements in this version. I was happy to see it now includes a progress bar by default (not sure how they overlooked that feature).

And lastly, though it was the first part of the talk, DHH described how he sees Rails as a "disaster kit" (he called it a backpack) of useful tools that will allow a single developer to create a decent-sized webapp on their own. That compares favorably with how I see Rails and what attracted me to the framework in the first place.

Back to Action Cable, since I'm horribly disorganized: one of things I really appreciate about Rails is that it gains new feature through extraction rather than invention. When I use a feature I have confidence that somebody else has already used it to build something useful and worn off some of the rough edges in the process. It seems like there are a lot of people in the community who are working to make the existing features in Rails better/faster/stronger, but it seems like there aren't as many who are adding new features to push the boundaries of what Rails can accomplish. I'm glad that DHH (and the other folks at Basecamp) are doing that. Even if I never use those features, the framework and the community are better for it.

### Session 1: So Long Hoboken: Migrating a Huge Production Codebase from Sinatra to Rails

I don't have a lot of takeaways from this one. Eric Weinstein described transitioning an app from Drupal to a Sinatra cluster backed by Java services, then to a Rails app (which might have been monolithic, I'm not sure). I've never wanted to go in that particular direction (Sinatra to Rails) so the general concept wasn't very gripping for me. It was interesting to hear *why* they made the switch. The initial design was intended to scale the different pieces independently (the specific example was scaling the Sinatra app that served the homepage during a spike of publicity). Unfortunately they didn't plan on having bottlenecks in their Java service layer. The user service in particular was a problem, since lots of functionality depended on that, so lots of stuff broke when it got overloaded.

I'm sure there's a good lesson in there on thinking really hard about dependencies and ideal separation when you're designing a SOA.

### Session 2: Speed Science

This session was packed. The organizers kicked out a bunch of people who were standing in the back. I guess they were violating the fire code.

Schneems gave a good talk. It was funny, the examples were relevant and he went the extra mile and wore a white lab coat.

Takeaways for me:

* Use the scientific method to diagnose performance issues
* Measure, measure, measure
* Your intuition can easily be wrong
* Schneems' definition of "large file" is small enough for network IO to not be a bottleneck

### Lunch

Sandwiches! Lines! Empty Sandwich Platters! Oh noes!

When I checked in on Monday my name badge had a little green sticker on the bottom. I thought it meant I was special. The guys behind the counter thought it meant I'd ordered special meals. Oh, right, vegetarian here. So far: no special meals. Unless there's a table in the corner somewhere I'm not seeing (entirely possible, there are 1500 people here and it's a big room). All of the tables have had a mix of vegetarian and non-veggie options, though. So, score!

Tuesday's lunch was sandwiches, preceded by horrible, horrible line management. Following directions from the helpful staff, I attempted to use one of the tables in the back. Then I had to work my back to the front to find a table that hadn't been entirely devoured.

In the end, I got my sandwich! It was tasty. I was satisfied.

### Session 3: DevOps for The Lazy

Aja Hammerly from Google gave an overview of Docker and Kubernetes. I enjoyed this talk. She hit just the right level of detail for my current understanding of Docker and presented some very interesting stuff.

Takeaways:

* Docker is cool (knew that already, but whatever)
* Kubernetes looks like some great orchestration for multiple docker images
* You can get a Linux VM from Google (it's not just App Engines! Who knew!?)
* boot2docker is easy to setup (figured that out on my own during the next session)

### Session 4: ~~5 Secrets We Learned While Building a Bank in 16 Months~~ Docker isn't just for deployment

I didn't end up at the talk I'd planned to see (a talk ran long, a cloud of people waiting, whatever). So I ended up back in the previous room for more Docker.

Ben Dixon talked about converting VMs to Docker images to provide development sandboxes for coding students. They wrote an API wrapper; they improved efficiencies by 250%; it was interesting; it was over in 20 minutes.

It turned out I didn't mind how short the session was. Rather than pay close attention, I was playing with Docker! I learned a lot doing that, and Ben's gorgeous accent made for nice background music. Love that accent.

Takeaways:

* Docker is much more efficient than a VM
* There are some good Ruby gems for controlling Docker
* I might need to seek professional help

### Sessions 5 & 6: Get started with Component-based Rails applications!

I was excited about this session. In planning what labs I wanted to attend I'd viewed a presentation Stephan gave on this topic in 2013. My 70,000-line beast of an application could use a good componentization.

I was also interested to see how Stephan would pull this off as a lab. Creating gems is a bit fiddly. Decoupling code is a bit tricky. And I know from personal experience that getting a room full of people to follow along with a programming exercise is not easy. I wanted to see how someone else tackled these challenges.

Unfortunately, it went about as expected. I think Stephan overestimated the ability of the class to follow along and it got disorganized pretty quickly. He handled it fairly smoothly, though. He transitioned into a live coding demo then into a presentation style to cover the rest of the material. It wasn't a very good "lab", but it was an interesting and informative presentation.

Takeaways:

* Splitting code into gems and engines isn't too hard (on a technical level)
* Dependency management in that setup is a pain (lots of repetition and manual require statements)
* Rails has spoiled me, thank-you-very-much

### Closing Keynote

This was... interesting? Sara Chipps described her journey from a software developer to a hardware hacker. She showed off the product she's working on, and I'm hopeful my daughter will get to use it or something like it in ten years. She had some high-school students from New York come on stage and show off some drones they'd programmed.

Takeaways:

* This is a great time to be a high-school student in New York

### Wednesday: Keynote

Oh-my-goodness was this hilarious. Aaron Patterson spent the first 15 minutes of his talk telling puns, trolling DHH and Kent Beck and generally making everyone laugh. The rest of the talk was a meaty dive into the performance improvements he's been researching. This was interesting but slightly odd since he was presenting work in progress rather than completed improvements. That caveat came up several times, along with pictures of his cats.

Takeaways:

* Aaron Patterson might be the funniest man in Rails

### Session 1: Ditch Day!

I couldn't find a session that seemed interesting, so I took a break to have a design discussion with Paul and Trey. I had a blast, and we got some good work done. I love talking programming with smart people.

Takeaways:

* Part of the value in attending a conference can be talking shop with other programmers

### Session 2: Game Theory

This was the lightest of overviews on a very deep topic. She presented a brief overview of some topics, then gave examples of how two strategies could used for load balancing: bargaining and auctioning. The bargaining example was simpler, since the strategy is simpler. The auctioning example was more in depth, involving some math and background explanations.

I'm not sure how applicable this stuff will be for me. I did appreciate the overview, though. I feel like I learned to recognize when game theory might be useful and where to start looking when doing further research.

### Lunch

Good news! They figured out the line issues. They didn't put food on the front tables until people where queued up at the back tables. The food was tasty, too.

### Session 3: Dynamically Sassy

I wasn't excited about this talk, but I thought it might be interesting. That meant I spent most of the talk trying to apply the component principals from Tuesday to my codebase. There was something about compiling sass on the fly, and caching it to get better performance. I probably would have gotten more out of it if this was something I needed (or wanted) to do.

### Session 4: Crossing the Canyon of Cognizance: A Shared Adventure

This talk was great and keeps getting better the more I think on it. It was presented well, with a nice little cartoon story about a unicorn learning to program by climbing a mountain (it was a metaphor, obviously).

She did a great job covering what it's like to learn something new. The different stages a person goes through on their way to mastering a topic, and what your responsibilities are at each stage. The main focus was on transitioning from late beginner (stage 2: unconscious incompetence) to early mastery (stage 3: conscious incompetence). She gave some good advice on how to *ask* for help when you're at stage 2, and how to *give* help when you're at stage 3. She also touched on the responsibility that people at stage 4 (unconscious competence) have to help others move up the mountain, and how that "unconscious" part can make it difficult. Apparently very few people make it to conscious competence (which requires being aware of how you attained your knowledge so that you can guide others along the same path).

My biggest takeaway from this (so far) is how it relates to a good conference talk. She used the metaphor of a forest to explain stage 1: not only do you not know where you are, but you don't have enough context to know which direction to go to leave the forest. I've decided that getting someone "out of the forest" is one way to make a good conference talk. It's useless for people who are already up the mountain, but that's fine. As long as your description is clear in the schedule, those people will go watch something else.

### Session 5: What if Shakespeare Wrote Ruby

This might have been the funnest session at the entire conference. It was certainly the most energetic. Adam is a trained actor and has a terrific stage presence. His goal for the talk was to relate the way Shakespeare used the expressive power of the English language to embed layers of meaning in his work with how programmers can use the expressive power of Ruby to embed additional meaning in our programs.

Along the way he got the audience to stand on their chairs, clear a space in the middle of the room, throw balls at each other and get up on stage and recite Romeo and Juliet in costume. It was fantastic.

Now, I hate when people use the word "potential" to praise something I've created. It's a pet peeve. In my mind it means I've failed to achieve my goal. With that in mind: this talk had incredible potential. I could see the kernel of what Adam was getting at, but he didn't *quite* manage to tie the two concepts together for me. I'd love to see him condense the talk and refine it with more code examples to tie the concepts together. I think this would make a fantastic keynote at a future conference.

### Happy Hour

This was in the expo hall with all the vendors. It was loud. Since I'm absolutely *awesome* with large, noisy groups of people, I ended up wandering around the rest of the building.

### Lightning Talks

Sadly, I skipped these. I heard some of them were good, so I wish I had arranged my dinner schedule differently.

### Thursday: Keynote

This was a two-parter: the Ruby Hero Awards and Rails Core Team panel. The Ruby Hero Awards were awesome. On Tuesday, Paul introduced me to Jeremy who maintains the Sequel library (which I love) and a bunch of other stuff. On Thursday he received an award for how much he does for the community. It was pretty awesome seeing someone you know (even briefly) getting well-deserved recognition.

The Core Team panel wasn't so great, though. The acoustics in the main hall were pretty awful, and a bunch of uncomfortable people mumbling into lapel mics didn't help the situation. Maybe I'll watch it on Confreaks later with the direct audio feed.

### Session 1: What Comes After MVC

This was probably the best technical talk at the conference for me. He walked through breaking a large model apart using four techniques:

* Value objects (immutable with no side effects)
* Entities (mutable with no side effects)
* Adapters (immutable with side effects)
* Shells (mutable with side effects)

I was somewhat familiar with the first three concepts, but he broke them down very well with good code examples that clarified how they could be used. I haven't seen shells before, and I'm not sure if he rushed through that part or if it just didn't click for me. I'm planning to watch this again on Confreaks, so hopefully I can make more sense out of that.

He also had the concept of "other" code, which was everything else (apparently)? Again, the concept wasn't entirely clear (which makes sense; it's hard to draw lines around "everything else").

One of the things I appreciated most was his emphasis on applying the principals partially and only when they make sense. You don't have to fully convert a codebase in order to get the benefits from this stuff.

### Session 2: See You On The Trail

I really wanted to see this talk, since I have the hardest time understanding the logic behind the libraries Nick Sutterer creates. For instance: I think Cells is great, but I can never remember where to put view templates and the concept of "states" completely eludes my understanding. So I was really hoping that seeing him explain Trailblazer would make it all click.

That didn't happen.

The talk was good. Nick is a funny guy and I'm glad I got to see his presentation. About the only useful information I got out of it though was that Trailblazer is an attempt to establish conventions around the "service object" concept. That makes sense. I still feel lost when I look at the examples, though.

### Lunch

Honestly, I can't even remember what they served for this meal. I remember it begin tasty, though. Maybe mac & cheese?

This was the most eventful of the lunches for me, though. There was an older lady from D.C. that I kept running into during the conference (name starts with B, but isn't Barbara or Brenda. I'm so awful with names). She's the Director of Technology (i.e.: one-woman tech wizard) for a small direct mail company founded by a friend. Our two previous meetings I had sat next to her and we exchanged programmer-pleasantries. This time *she* found *me*, and we had a nice technical discussion about structuring CSV export code and how to raise children in a high-tech world. It was awesome.

### Session 3: Deploy and Manage Ruby on Rails Apps on AWS

This was a two session lab, and a great use of time. We did a hands-on exercise deploying a simple Rails app with Amazon's OpsWorks, then hooking it up to SES for sending email. There was a bit at the end about hooking CloudFront into the asset pipeline, but I had to take a bio break before I got that far. I've got the instructions though, so I might give that a whirl later.

I'm extremely impressed with what Amazon has put together in OpsWorks. It's basically a web front-end to Chef Solo, and comparing it to the headaches of maintaining my own Chef infrastructure is night and day. It was *so* easy to get something running and appears to be very customizable. Amazon recently released the ability to manage your own physical servers through the platform, and I'm finding that notion very compelling.

### Session 4: Voila, Indexes! A Look at Some Simple Preventative Magic

I dropped in on the last half of this since I saw Trey sitting in the back. It was a quirky intro to using indexes in your database. I didn't learn anything new, but when I was first getting started with Rails this talk would have been fantastic.

### Session 5: Nothing is Something

Hands down the best talk of the conference. Sandi Metz went through two concepts of Object Oriented Design in a brilliant, mind-blowing presentation (this might be hyperbole, or might not. Go watch it for yourself).

The first concept was about not using inheritance to share behavior. She had a great example of how subclassing can paint you into a corner and how to use dependency injection with adapter classes to get yourself back out.

She also demonstrated a nice technique to help you isolate exactly where an adapter class was missing. I think this is where the title of the talk came from (although it's applicable to the second concept she presented, as well). The core idea is that your code is missing something (a "thing"), but because of the way it's structured that "thing" is implicit and functionally invisible. It looks like nothing, but it's actually something, and if you can pull it out and give it a name, your code and design will be better.

The second concept was about using null objects to replace nils. This wasn't nearly as mind blowing (since the concept isn't new to me), but it did make me realize that's there's no reason that ActiveRecord ever needs to return nil! I would welcome a world without `#try` scattered all over my views.

### Closing Keynote

Kent Beck (the dude that created Extreme Programming) talked about feeling at ease at work. He gave some good, practical advice on how to work like a grown-up, and how that will make your professional life feel less chaotic.

Since this immediately followed Sandi's talk it lost a lot of its impact. It was still a good talk and well presented.
